.. title: Graduated
.. slug: graduated
.. date: 2020-01-04 23:09:10 UTC-08:00
.. tags: 
.. category: 
.. link: 
.. description: 
.. type: text

.. image::  https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/s/i6hs7kdz09ylgo3/IMG-20191213-WA0023.jpg
   :align: left
   :width: 400
   :height: 600

I graduated from OMSCS, Online Masters in Computer Science Program from Georgia
Tech. I accomplished my personal goal of a Masters in Computer Science from a
reputed university.  I got admitted into this program in 2014 and continued to
take one class per 15-week term. I decided to go a few extra miles by taking
three classes more than required, and graduated with a specialization in both
"Computational Perception and Robotics," and "Software Systems."

**My journey**

My desire to do a master's in computer science was one of my first wishes in my
career.  I did my schooling and college in India. I had missed going to a
reputed college. So, I started trying to get into a Masters in Computer
Science. I failed in 2002 in my first attempt. I started working and earning
money. I took courses and tried again in 2003 and failed. I must have tried yet
again in 2004 and failed. My understanding of the subjects, and more
importantly, my planning skills were feeble.

I started taking courses as I could not give up on my desire to learn Computer
Science. I took Continuing Education Proficiency Courses from IISc offered on
Wednesday evenings. These courses paved the way for me to get into a CPython
Development through Google Summer of Code program.

I had not achieved my desired goal of getting into a master's program in
Computer Science. So, I started trying again in 2007. After having work
experience, having four patents from work, having done part-time courses, I
applied again. This time for US universities. I tried for 10 universities in
2007 and got rejected by all of them. In 2008, I tried again for 5 universities
and got rejected by them. I went for it in 2009 and did not get into any of the
5 universities.  In 2010, I got one admit through referral, but I decided not
to pursue it as it was not suitable for me. In 2012, I almost enrolled in a
part-time master's program but did not pursue it as it was not Computer
Science.

In 2014, the OMSCS program was launched, and it looked very promising. I
applied, and I got an admit in its second offering. I took it up. I started my
classes in Jan 2015, and after taking 13 courses, completed it in December
2019.  I have a GPA of 3.21.

My significant recollection during this course is my failure (getting a C) in
Computational Photography due to a mistake I made. I could have been out of the
program, but I became careful, corrected myself, and retook the course to get B
grade.

The experience has shaped me well as a person. The journey was fun, eventful.
My family, my wife, Shalini, supported me a lot. She would regularly check-in
with my plans and plan our social outings accordingly.

We had celebrated our first Kid, Siddhartha's 1st birthday, when I had started
this program. We had our second kid, Saharsha, while I was doing the courses.
Keeping them entertained while doing masters is challenging.  I used to put
them to sleep and then return back to my computer for completing the assignments.

In terms of work, I had lost a job, got a new job, and then changed a new
one during this timeframe. I struggled a bit to balance work
and study but managed to concentrate on work and not let one disturb the plans
of the other.

.. image:: https://dl.dropbox.com/s/x2x2zyk9rigcxck/IMG_20191213_180112.jpg
   :align: left
   :width: 400
   :height: 600

Finally, we celebrated my graduation with a family trip to Atlanta, and my wife
Shalini organized a party with our friends.

